Nick Smith is 20 it has an extremely
rare genetic condition called primordial
dwarfism which means he'll always be the
size of a three-year-old else yeah check
you now okay okay
Nick's condition means he suffers with
serious illnesses
he said multiple surgeries problems with
the kidneys probably of cholesterol
problems of blood pressure primordial
dwarves have very short life expectancy
many don't survive to the age Nikki's
now you get too old at 18 Nick had
life-saving surgery on three aneurysms
bulges in the vessels feeding blood to
his brain
now the problems back Nick need surgery
to remove another aneurysm that could
burst and take his life at any moment
you feel like you're walking around with
the time bomb we don't know when it
could rupture scientists are racing to
understand how the gene mutation the
causes primordial dwarfism works
to help prolong the life of Nick and
others with the condition one of the
things that everybody asks themselves
was where are the older kids
where are the individuals that are in
their 20s and 30s over the next three
months we follow Nick his family and his
doctors as they battle to save the life
of the boy who never grew up Jefferson
is a small city in the southern American
state of Georgia this ordinary place is
home to an extraordinary young man Nick
Smith is one of only a few hundred
people worldwide born with a genetic
condition called primordial dwarfism
measuring less than 3 feet in height and
weighing under two stones Nick is the
same size as a healthy three-year-old
but Nick is almost 21 and is not just
physically small
yes sir sighs nick has learning
difficulties which mean he'll forever
see the world as a child
spongebob mad Nick is the apple of his
mom's eye nick is such a happy person
he's priceless he's precious oh he's
great oh it keeps everything still like
you know like I had a child that never
really grew up you know I look at your
picture slaw you love picture gotcha
Shelly realized early in her pregnancy
that Nick was going to be small that's
you in an incubator I'd had a an 8-pound
baby before and I knew what it felt like
to have a child growing and kicking and
with Nicholas I never really felt like I
was really getting big yeah I had to put
you in a little baby doll carriage cuz
you're too small and they pulled you out
to do your feedings I'm told you haven't
had to clean out your your bed totally
couldn't hold you there yeah I mean they
had to clean your diaper
when he was born he was 2 pounds 4
ounces 12 inches long he had personality
he was alert and I knew when I saw him
that we were gonna be alright yeah yeah
I finally get to hold you yo Pete
I was happy I am happy yeah they're
gonna eat their eggs come on they finish
up when we gotta go whoa when he was
born
Nick was a medical mystery because there
was no tests to confirm but my son had
we probably didn't find out really what
Nicholas had until he was about 10 years
old happy birthday sweetie
Nick was finally diagnosed with
microcephalic osteo dysplastic
primordial dwarfism or MO PD - the
essential characteristics of somebody
with mo PD - is that they were born
small they stay small and that they have
small head circumference of small heads
in general their proportions that is the
trunk size relative to their limbs
it is pretty proportionate okay and when
they're fully mature their length is
equivalent to about a four-year-old in
their head circumference - about a five
to six month old Nick's tiny head means
his vocal folds and larynx are also
miniature creating a high-pitched voice
hola brother Travis and younger brother
Levi grew up watching Nick struggle
every day the fact that Nick's middle
son and he didn't turn out like we did I
was after him and I came out to be
normal
that's always the question I'm I'm on it
could happen Zach that could have been
me just like him you can't get me yeah
nope I always joke around and say me and
my brother stole the tall jeans before
he could get himself it's definitely a
little ironic just cuz the whole
family's you know very tall and oh I
don't know how that happens honestly
nice hit go get it go get it to me by
avoiding the genetic fault
Nick's brothers have sidestep a long
list of medical problems that he's had
to endure
hi Nick
alright Nicky ready let's see how tall
you are nick has had eight major
operations ranging from correction of
curvature of the spine to hip surgery
new issues can arise without warning so
he's constantly under medical
supervision yeah check you now okay okay
stand up straight for me
bend over touch toes all right put
clothes on okay he's going I have no
Nick since he came home from the
hospital after he was born and it has
had a lot of significant problems over
the years his problems
you know stem probably more from his
primary orphism
than anything but he's you know he's had
multiple surgeries comes with kidneys
problems of blood pressure
he said major spine surgery his most
significant problems now are probably
his aneurysms Nick's last operation was
the hardest so far two years ago he had
life-saving surgery on three brain
aneurysms an aneurysm is a bulge in the
wall of an artery here feeding blood to
the brain if the aneurysm bursts blood
leaks into the brain which can cause a
stroke and be fatal as he can exercise
these days so he was doing the ketone
brain right now doctors have discovered
that Nick has another brain aneurysm and
needs major surgery or he could die
in a fortnight Nick and Shelly will
travel to California for an operation
they hope will save his life
[Music]
well you have to go out there and see
some special people I'm gonna talk to us
when we get out there about doing some
things for us like honey but I'm gonna
be there with you no matter what okay
yeah don't need me I won't leave you I'm
there to take care of you you feel like
you're kind of walking around with a
time bomb we don't know when it could
rupture and in some circumstances
recovery or the outcome is a lot worse
so if a ruptured aneurysm can mean
that's it are they like wait you could
do your exercises in ten days time Nick
Smith will be travelling from his
hometown in Georgia for brain surgery in
California in the meantime is at the
high school he's been attending for the
last four years nick has no trouble
getting along when he came to me his
parents were very worried about him
coming to the high school and being
around people that were so much taller
and so much bigger and how are the kids
gonna treat him that is not a problem
here
hey well this is Miss Jennifer she's my
new helper up here you like all the
girls I have up here don't you don't
winking at her yeah
you're just kidding yeah you work out
Nick does not see any difference between
himself and anyone else there are times
that he'll say I'm as tall as you are
and we say yeah you're tall it's gonna
be right here he truly doesn't see that
he's any different than anybody else
everybody wants to see you you're
popular while Nick's at mainstream
school most of his classes are designed
for students with special needs Wow all
right dude I would say Nick's learning
group is around six or seven years old
the activities that we typically do were
things that you would see in a
kindergarten age classroom so we've got
seven green and seven red so what does
that make this equal good job we work on
daily stuff like colors letters numbers
that kind of thing what's the first
letter all right No what's this letter
oh yeah oh and Nick's been with me for
four years and we're still working on
those same type of things know what
letter comes next no see he doesn't
really realize that he doesn't get them
right but he likes to try and he's
progressed a lot over the years but his
memory just isn't the same as what a
normal person's would be we have a hard
time seen in them 3d glasses Nick is the
only primordial dwarf in his home state
of Georgia but far from feeling isolated
the web has allowed parents like Shelley
to find families with children just like
Nick all over the world
gonna see us Jackie crits ik and her
daughter Hana live a thousand miles
north in Minnesota the network has
really become an important part of our
lives you know I was just starving to
find another mom that had a child like
mine did she have to go through all that
yeah is it painful yeah Kristy Jordan
and her two primordial children Bree and
Brad are in the Midwest state of
Illinois for each other's support system
where each other's family we treat
others friends the network is more than
just a support group with little known
about their children's condition the
parents decided to act themselves we
realized that we knew nothing about our
diagnosis nor did any of the experts so
the physicians that we went to locally
didn't know anything and so our outlook
was kind of educating each other and to
find those families doctors to be able
to help us help ourselves for over a
decade the families have attended the
little peoples conference of America
where the children can meet up and the
mums track down medical experts it was
at the conference in 2004 that Shelley
and the other mums met dr. Michael boba
and asked for his help one of the things
that everybody asks themselves in the
room was where are the older kids where
are the individuals that are in their
20s and 30s and the answer to that
question now seems to be that
individuals were dying from strokes from
aneurysms that were bursting and they
were having large bleeds in their head
often fatal
to prevent these early deaths in people
like Nick dr. Bober and his colleagues
first have to understand what causes mo
PD to that's something being researched
on both sides of the Atlantic in the
last five years we've learned that the
cause of Mo PD - is due to mutations in
the Perry central gene so Perry Central
is really important to cell division
now cells are building blocks that make
us who we are so for instance in MO PD -
we think most of these genes are acting
to slow down cell division and because
you've got less building blocks you end
up with a smaller person having
established why people like nikka so
small the next problem is how to help
them one of the important things about
once we've identified a gene is to try
and understand what health problems are
associated with it and this is an area
which I worked really closely with dr.
Bober on is trying to link up the gene
changes we find with the sorts of
problems that we get so for instance an
MFP d2 we know they get brain aneurysms
now they get brain aneurysms at a very
high frequency and that means to us but
there must be something about the Perry
central gene which is important for
blood vessel formation and how blood
vessels forming this discovery has led
doctors to look at other vascular issues
that could affect children with mo PD -
the type of vascular disease that we've
recognized to date have really focused
on the blood vessels in and around the
brain but as time has gone on we've
recognized that the vessels that feed
the kidneys the vessels that feed the
heart can also have involvement and try
some of those noodles these circulatory
problems mean that young people like
Nick suffer with illnesses we'd
associate with old age
somebody getting tired let's go get an
alternate your ego bed I'll pipe in the
bed so I can get you two medicines me
your medicine for your high blood
pressure and for your kidneys fine
kidneys are fine
yeah it just seemed like when he turn 18
it was the high blood pressure the
kidney failure the aneurysms now it's
the cholesterol and then we're facing
another aneurysm soap it's almost like
an 18 year old it's really going through
an 80 year old body okay okay yeah I
fall something wrong there didn't you
fairy I think it's just time to rest not
too hot oh yeah you like that you like
that didn't you cuddled up good
yeah totally my feet getting cold up
there in that night the mood bugs bite
four days before the big operation let's
go do it
[Music]
Nick needs his vital signs measured and
blood tested to check he's healthy
enough to undergo surgery with his
aneurysm surgery imminent Nick's
previous operation is preying on
Shelly's mind never do you expect to see
your child come out with surgery
horrible scars breathing like they
couldn't catch their breath and it was
heart-wrenching like I couldn't do
anything for him
I couldn't comfort him I couldn't hold
him all right that's it oh you did it oh
yeah
what's back is watch yes what'd I say
[Laughter]
it's Nick's last day of school and his
final lesson is with regular students
I'm gonna come around and ask each
student which one they want to plant do
they want to plant forget-me-nots or
parsley okay Nick which one do you want
to plant forget-me-nots or parsley it's
putting Nick with the regular education
students it gives them a heart a lot of
times teenagers are a little
self-centered and don't think about
things outside of themselves are those
big seeds or little seeds thank you
don't drop them okay and your table and
so when Nick comes around it makes them
stop and think and even be grateful I've
heard them say that they're thankful for
what they have when they start talking
to Nick especially learning about all
the health troubles that he's gone
through
Nik may not be fully aware of the risks
he now faces but everyone else is we're
all very worried we try not to think
about it and talk about it too much
because we don't want to get upset all
the time
especially in front of him or the kids
but the reality is is that we don't know
what's going to happen from the surgery
or after the surgery it's just
devastating to us to think about
anything other than him coming back to
us the same only in the exact same way
[Music]
today says the last day of school will
be leaving the California on Saturday so
we're gonna let him stay from school
tomorrow he has I think some sense so
that there's something going on he's had
a lot of tests done lately so he he he
wonders why the needles and why the
poking and testing and he hears this
talking about it yeah I getting a little
bit nervous
this trip is huge it's major medical
procedure to help save his life and
unfortunately we have to go through it
[Applause]
[Music]
you know so you have a good day yeah did
you tell everybody you're gonna go but I
didn't see him when you come back from
your trip yeah yeah yeah let's do samba
simba Matata don't worry you look cute
both the brothers are taking time off
work to spend time with Nick before he
leaves the surgery in California and
definitely worries me but besides that I
always try to look at it in a positive
light
I never really try to focus in on what
could happen or that you know if it
doesn't doesn't go to surgery something
worse could happen so that's why I try
to look at it
Nick how are you feeling about going to
California you know I think it's better
than that visit knows what's going on
just because in his own mind he's having
fun and here's a Hathaway so much and be
like under pressure and this lives a
happy child life the night before their
Li for California a video call remind
Shellie that they're living on borrowed
time
that breaks my heart Jackie and Hannah
have some devastating news about the
unexpected death of one of Nick's
younger primordial friends all of us in
the back of our minds are because of
what we're hearing our risk factors and
knowing what our kids already have and
then for you to be going through this
with Nick now that has got to be just so
heavy you know I count what's about a
heaven he says in heaven hold yeah and
he says no pain I think he's just gonna
go to sleep and then he'll wake up and
you know yeah hey you have to stay like
a possum
oh no we're not maybe we've already
talked about this he's saying he's gonna
play dead like a possum and I said we
don't want to use that example
[Applause]
okay get your jammies in there let's go
yeah yeah
I've been staying so strong with the
surgery and just staying positive and
when you lose someone you just just
really shows you this we just never know
you know we know they're getting older
the health issues are getting a little
more severe and I guess with this
surgery I know you know Eric it's coming
up and it just it makes it that much
harder because you know it's it's
reality and I could you don't be facing
the same situation feeling it today
20-year old Nick Smith and his mum
Shelly are making a two-and-a-half
thousand mile journey to California for
an operation they hope will save his
life looks like how about you find me
which shoes you want to wear my new ones
are most comfortable for your feet we do
that you know I get a little nervous
sometimes fine he doesn't seem to bother
him at all I like him but you don't like
to sleep on the plane do you he'll never
any operation on the delicate body of a
primordial is dangerous but brain
surgery
raises the stakes even higher it's hard
to say but I think it's harder on the
family than it is sometimes the patient
[Music]
having to say goodbye is tough for 18
year old now there's no turning back
the ordeal ahead suddenly hips help
hurts the painful the needles she get
the needle you're okay in here yeah
they're little stop though nobody nobody
likes that Nick yeah
I know t-shirts trailing boy aren't you
strong
[Music]
but just books to read and books would
be negative you know liking like what
would what you going for yeah I'm scared
yeah we'll talk about it no you want me
to change the subject
go something else yeah what you want to
talk about
okay let's talk about your girlfriend
Nick surgery in California will be on an
aneurysm a dangerous bulge in an artery
feeding blood to his brain
the size of the aneurysm means it could
rupture causing a fatal brain bleed at
any time you see here on this vessel
that is the left carotid artery we have
this ballooning of the vessel wall that
constitutes a brain aneurysm a weak spot
on the vessel that makes this person
more prone for brain bleeding surgeons
will perform an endovascular coiling
procedure where tiny loops of platinum
are packed inside the aneurysm so the
blood clots closing off the Bulge
that means going in through Nick's groin
through the groin would have the natural
highways that are the blood vessels
navigating under x-ray guidance all the
way to the inside of the Animus and then
we can go inside the aneurysm and feel
divided with this little very soft
platinum wires as you can see here very
soft and create a bird's nest that will
induce clogging of the aneurysm and
prevent further bleeding you want your
back scratch again yeah I just want to
let you know there's nothing to worry
about
you've been such a tough cookie all the
way haven't you Nick we'll see your
tummy remember this one this is the
first surgery they did when you're a
baby just to try to put a tube in your
stomach to help you eat Wow we were in a
water park one day and the little boy
came up to him saw the little tube said
to his mom look mom he's inflatable so
that was the cutest thing so listen
tomorrow remember last time they had to
cut in your skull Yelp will remember and
they cut you you had that scar on your
head yeah all right they're not gonna do
that to you tomorrow okay they're not
gonna do that how they're gonna do is
put you to sleep and you won't even know
but they're gonna fix a little spot in
your head while you're sleeping so when
you wake up it's gonna be all over with
yeah and you can watch it all the TV you
want thank you and you can eat Krabby
Patties minnow macaroni
all eggs as soon as you're up feeling
better you get out of the hospital and
we can go back home
[Music]
NIC's operation will be at one of the
world's leading pediatric hospitals the
Lucile Packard at Stanford University
only a handful of surgeons have ever
performed this type of procedure on
someone with Nick's condition even for
an experienced pediatric surgeon
operating on a primordial dwarf adds
another level of complexity to operating
a primordial is certainly different than
to operating a child of same size
because the primordial have different
characteristics on the blood vessels on
the anatomy of the brain in changes in
many of the other organs and systems
that a child of the same size would not
have that creates a much more fragile
system that you have to be prepared to
deal with so a brain aneurysm has the
potential of bleeding at any second
there is a real possibility
Nick's aneurysm could rupture during
surgery if that happens there's a 50%
chance he won't make it knowing the odds
leaves Shelley struggling with a
decision to go ahead with Nick's
operation the reality is that we don't
know it's gonna happen with our children
we don't know how long we have them but
it's almost like you know would you walk
around and wonder what have him with a
time bomb or correct him knowing that
coming down it's process he might not
have the quality of life that he once
had nor could he make it with Nick's
aneurysm surgery under way his future is
in the surgeons hands
[Music]
okay this is Nick we're breaking out of
the work today
come on let's get down
Nik for our operation was a success the
coil was inserted without his aneurysm
rupturing
[Music]
did you make it through surgery it's all
over it's amazing
no more surgeries no more pokes yeah no
more needles I'm following you boy and
yet either way I fall
this is your walk after only three days
in hospital Nick's allowed home to his
family after the surgery Nick you know
actually jump right back to normal just
like Nick always does and just lucky for
us but it's great
[Music]
it's now a month after neck surgery
Shelly and Nick are flying to Minnesota
after everything that we've been through
my goal is just to enjoy life and mean
Nicholas we're gonna go have a lot of
fun and just embrace every moment that
we can together right what makes him
happy is he's a funny person he
understands fun and laughing and cutting
up and that's the healthy part of life
you know for us to be able to spend some
time and share a trip together and put
all that stuff behind you for a week
that's why we're looking forward to
they're friends from the network are
coming from around the country for a
surprise celebration for Nick it's the
first time the group has met outside the
annual little people's conference it's
-5 degrees in Minnesota so Nick and the
gang are starting their day out inside
at the Sea Life Aquarium Nick's
primordial friends a 21 year old Brad
Brett's older sister brie is 23 17 year
old Hannah and Trinity who's 10 for us
to get together as primordial families
it's one of the best experiences because
the kids they are just like best friends
they're almost like sisters and brothers
my team regular large tough time cakes
nicely seen other little people
Matt things creepy cuz you're not tall
like me
well
[Music]
just make like this we do a lot things
that people think they're too hard for
us they think we can't do but we'll find
out as a special finale to the day
there's a surprise for Nick he's finally
going to meet his hair
[Music]
one of our things is we want them to
live their lives to the fullest and have
every dream or hope that they can have
come true
so that they live while they're alive
and they live and feel important I would
like to do a celebratory toast I want
everybody to raise their glass and just
say here here for all of the mums it's
important that the children celebrate
while they can because the harsh reality
of their lives
is never far away each parent has to
make a decision of how open they are to
discuss the realism of their illnesses
the outcomes the treatments well for
brand Brad we've always been very
upfront and to me it empowers them to
take care of themselves it helps them
understand why they go through mundane
testing why they take multiple pills why
they have to go to the doctor five
states away it helps them be that person
to pave the way for the next little guy
very worried about making a surgery yeah
I think he was a praying nervous I would
be nervous I had my surgery I was pretty
nervous
I don't like medical stuff I just don't
like anything right surgeries and only
thing I don't worry about that person
for the children understanding that
condition doesn't make accepting it any
easier it's really sad because we lost
one of our kids thank you
for Hanna that is kind of put into a
perspective for her they were my age mom
and they're not with us anymore
and then the tears and that has been the
hardest thing and you know I would I we
have to say is that you know we don't
know how how long you're gonna have none
of us do we're all human beings you know
we have God has a plan for all of us so
we're just gonna live each day like it's
our last day but not just you we're all
gonna be doing that we each have today
we're not promised tomorrow Nick doesn't
have the same level of understanding as
the rest of the group and for his
friends that's a good thing Mick and his
friends are doing well for now but the
big question remains how can their short
lives be prolonged the holiday to
Minnesota gives Nick and his friends a
chance to hang out with people who are
on their level it's probably one not a
good idea for him to have the cat
but it also performs a vital function as
a forum for the mums to discuss medical
developments and new ideas the outsider
looking in may think this is something
that medical experts should know but if
we don't know and there's only one child
in that state or one child in that
country how do we expect medical
professionals to know that's one thing I
wanted to know without these groups in
this organization there would be no
research there would be no progress at
all this whole field owes everything to
those groups if I see one child all I
can do is do my best for that one child
but if I see 20 children with the same
rare condition now I have a much clearer
idea about how to take care of that one
child and that's really what's happened
I'm trying to remember right know I know
it's all put on that USB the medical
research pursued by these mothers means
treatment for their children has gone
from reactive to proactive early
screening for aneurysms monitoring
cholesterol and management of renal
failure means these children now live
longer the life expectancy for people
that have mo PD too is not average it's
definitely shorter but it's improving
it's much better now because of the
screening program for aneurysms the
treatment programs that we've put in
place we are seeing individuals live
longer there are many more people in
their 20s in their 30s with mo PD too so
I think that age is being pushed up and
people live longer and longer every year
as this generation is living into their
20s the friends can have ambitions in
life beyond childhood I mean 11 3 let's
drag Roger I don't play know why I'm
doing it
till I get out of school yet I love
entertainment stuff acting from acting
or I'd be in a band I want you to play
the drums
I'm not having plenty drums yeah you do
right yeah you do I'm a good better I am
I see see make me that's all I know
I'm nice and funny
yeah you all right yeah I think he want
to be a comedy as you like to tell a
large oak back at home in Georgia Nick's
about to start a new phase of his life
[Music]
he's about to turn 21 and that means
moving on from the pediatric doctor he's
always known so Nick
buddy's gonna miss you you know do you
understand that mommy's gonna have to
find you a new doctor yeah you get too
old yeah hitting 21 also means only one
more year at school what is it Carl it's
the Constitution can't eat people have
rights right this world is not built for
Nick you know this world is not
accessible to him and so we try to put
everything into every day just to make
him have as many experiences in as many
happy moments as we can possibly fit in
Nick's lifespan may be limited but for
the family Nick still has hopes and
dreams for his future that are no
different to anyone else's told you
doesn't like to lose it likes to be like
everybody else wants to be able to ride
four-wheelers and do everything we do
biggest thing is I want him to feel that
he is just like everyone else and he is
just like everyone else inside yes you
know he has big dreams he thinks he's
gonna grow up and be just like his daddy
one day I'll get you out of those
jackets yeah I know he still lives my
thing in a beautiful place it's kind of
like not reality but it's in his world
he's still gonna achieve and be whoever
he wants to be and and that to me is a
beautiful thing
[Music]
you